# Chapter 07

## GDP and CPI: Tracking the Macroeconomy

### National Accounts

```{note}
National income and product accounts are also known as **national accounts**.

A method of calculating and keeping track of
- consumer spending
- sales of producers
- business investment spending
- government purchases
- a variety of other flows of funds between different sectors of the economy.


4 flows of funds into the markets for goods and services:
- consumer spending (households)
- government purchases of goods and services (government)
- exports and imports (rest of world)
- investment spending (firms).
```

**GDP/Gross domestic product**<br>
Total value of all ***final goods and services*** produced in the economy during a given period.

$GDP = C + I + G + X - IM$

```{admonition} Final goods and services vs. Intermediate goods and services
**Final goods and services**<br>Goods and services sold to the final, or end user.

**Intermediate goods and services**<br>Goods and services bought from one firm by another firm that are inputs for production of final goods and services.
```

**Methods for calculating GDP**
- Value-Added Approach<br>Adding up total value of all final goods and services produced.
- Expenditure Approach<br>Adding up spending on all domestically produced goods and services.
- Income Approach<br>Adding up total factor income earned by households from firms in the economy.

### Real GDP

**Real GDP**<br>
Total value of all final goods and services produced in the economy during a given year, calculated using the prices of a selected base year.

**Nominal GDP**<br>GDP at current prices.

### Price Indexes and Aggregate Output

**Market basket**<br>
A hypothetical consumption bundle, used to measure changes in the overall price level.

**Price index**<br>
A measure of the cost purchasing a given market basket in a given year, where that cost is normalized so that it is equal to 100 in the selected base year; a measure of overall price level.

$\text{Price Index in a Given Year} = \frac{\text{Cost of Market basket in a Given Year}}{\text{Cost of Market basket in Base Year}} \times 100$

**Inflation rate**<br>
Annual percent change in a price index.

$\text{Inflation Rate} = \frac{\text{Price Index in Year 2} - \text{Price Index in Year 1}}{\text{Price Index in Year 1}} \times 100$

**CPI/Consumer price index**<br>
A measure of prices; calculated by surveying market prices for a market basket intended to represent the consumption of a typical Canadian urban family.

$\text{CPI in a given Year} = \frac{\text{Cost of Market Basket in a given Year}}{\text{Cost of Market Basket in Base Year}} \times 100$

**IPPI/Industrial producer price index**<br>
A measure of the cost of a typical basket of goods and services purchased by producers. Because these commodity prices respond quickly to changes in demand, the IPPI is often regarded as a leading indicator of changes in the inflation rate.

**GDP deflator**<br>
A price measure for a given year that is equal to 100 times the ratio of nominal GDP to real GDP in that year.

$\text{GDP Deflator} =  \frac{\text{Nominal GDP for Given Year}}{\text{Real GDP for Given Year}} \times 100$