# Chapter 08

## Unemployment and Inflation

### Unemployment Rate
**Unemployment**<br>
Total number of people aged 15 or older who are actively looking for work but are not currently employed.

**Labour force**<br>
Sum of employment and unemployment of people who are currently working and who are currently looking for work.

**Labour force participation rate**<br>
$\text{Labour Force Participation Rate} = \frac{\text{Labour Force}}{\text{Population Aged 15 and Older}} \times 100$

**Unemployment rate**<br>
$\text{Unemployment Rate} = \frac{\text{Number of Unemployed Workers}}{\text{Labour Force}} \times 100$

```{admonition} Unemployment rate understates the true level of unemployment
3 types of people are omitted
- Discouraged workers<br>Individuals who want to work but who are not currently searching for a job because they see little prospect of finding one given the state of the job market.
- Marginally attached workers<br>Nonworking individuals who sau they would like a job and have looked for work in the recent past but are not currently looking for work.
- Underemployed workers<br>Number of people who work part time because they cannot find full-time jobs.
    - Visibly underemployed workers<br>Working fewer hours than they would like to do.
    - Invisibly underemployed workers<br>Jobs that do not use their skills fully or under paid.
```

```{note} 
There is a strong negative relationship between growth in real GDP and changes in the unemployment rate.

**Jobless recovery**<br>
A period in which real GDP growth rate is positive but the unemployment rate is still rising.
```

### Natural Rate of Unemployment

**Frictional unemployment**<br>
Unemployment due to the time workers spend in job search, which is inevitable.

**Structural unemployment**<br>
Unemployment results when there are more people seeking jobs in a particular labour market than there are jobs available at the current wage rate.

**Minimum wages**<br>
Government-mandated floor on the wage rate.

**Unions**<br>
Organizations of workers bargain collectively with employers to raise wages and improve living standards of their members, which have effects similar to those of minimum wages.

**Efficiency wages**<br>
Wages that employers set above the equilibrium wage rate as an incentive for their workers to perform better.

```{note}
A variety of factors lead to structural unemployment by raising wages above their market equilibrium level, like
- Minimum wages
- Unions
- Efficiency wages
- Side effects of government policies (Employment Insurance benefits).
```

**Cyclical unemployment**<br>
Difference between the actual rate of unemployment and the natural rate of unemployment due to downturns in the business cycle.

**Natural unemployment**<br>
Normal unemployment rate around which the actual unemployment rate fluctuates.

$\text{Natural Unemployment} = \text{Frictional Unemployment} + \text{Structural Unemployment}$

$\text{Actual Unemployment} = \text{Natural Unemployment} + \text{Cyclical Unemployment}$

### Inflation and Deflation

High rates of inflation impose real costs on the economy:
- Shoe-leather costs<br>Increased costs of transactions caused by inflation.
- Menu costs<br>Real cost of changing a listed price.
- Unit-of-account costs<br>Costs arising from the way inflation makes money a less reliable unit of measurement.

**Interest rate**<br>
Price calculated as a percentage of the amount borrowed, charged by the lender.

**Real interest rate**<br>
$\text{Real Interest Rate} = \text{Nominal Interest Rate} - \text{Inflation Rate}$

**Disinflation**<br>Process of bringing down inflation. It is very difficult and costly once a higher rate of inflation has become well established in the economy.