# Chapter 06

## Macroeconomics: The Big Picture

### Nature of Macroeconomics

```{admonition} What is macroeconomics?
Macroeconomics examines the ***overall*** behavior of the economy, like:

How the actions of all the individuals and firms in the economy interact to produce a particular economy-wide level of economic performance?

**But it is not just simply the sum of individual actions and market outcomes**.
```

**Different Economic Theories**
- Self-regulating economy<br>Economists believe that problems would be resolved without government intervention. Government intervention is ineffective and making things worse.
- Keynesian economics<br>A depressed economy is the result of inadequate spending. Government intervention can help a depressed economy through *monetary policy* and *fiscal policy*.

**Monetary policy**<br>Monetary policy uses changes in the quantity of money to alter interest rates to affect overall spending.

**Fiscal policy**<br>Fiscal policy uses changes in taxes and government spending to affect overall spending.

### Business Cycle

```{note}
**Recession**<br>
A widespread downturn, in which output and employment in many industries fall.

**Expansion**<br>
A period of economic upturn in which most economic numbers are following a normal upward trend.

**Business cycle**<br>
Alternation between recessions and expansions.

**Business-cycle peak**<br>
The point at which the economy shifts from expansion to recession.

**Business-cycle trough**<br>
The point at which the economy shifts from recession to expansion.
```

### Long-Run Economic Growth

**Long-run economic growth**<br>The sustained rise in the quantity of goods and services the economy produces.

```{note}
Long-run economic growth is a key area of macroeconomics. Long-run economic growth is the force behind long-term increases in living standards and is important for financing some economic programs.
```

### Inflation and Deflation

**Inflation**<br>A rise in the overall level of prices.

**Deflation**<br>A fall in the overall level of prices.

- In the short run, inflation and deflation are closely related to the business cycle.
- In the long run, prices tend to reflect changes in the overall quantity of money.
- Economists and policy makers aim for price stability.

### International Imbalances

**Open economy**<br>An economy trades goods and services.

**Trade deficit**<br>Deficit results when the value of import is more than the value of export.

**Trade surplus**<br>Surplus results when the value of export is more than the value of import.