# Chapter 09

## Long-Run Economic Growth

### Comparing Economies Across Time and Space

**Rule of 70**<br>
A mathematical formula states that the time it takes real GDP per capita to double is approximately 70 divided by that variable's annual growth rate.

$\text{Number of Years for Variable to Double} = \frac{70}{\text{Annual Growth Rate of Variable}}$

```{note}
Growth is measured as changes in real GDP per capita in order to eliminate the effects of changes in the price level and changes in population size. Levels of real GDP per capita vary greatly around the world.
```

### Sources of Long-Run Growth

- Labour productivity
- Physical capital
- Human capital
- Technological progress

### Accounting for Growth: Aggregate and Per Worker Production Functions

**Aggregate production function**<br>
Shows how the aggregate real quantity of output is produced using the available factors of production with the inputs of labour, physical capital, human capital, and technology.<br>
$Y = A \times F(K, L, H)$

**Per worker production function**<br>
Shows how productivity depends on the quantities of physical capital per worker and human capital per worker as well as the state of technology.<br>
$\frac{Y}{L} = A \times F(\frac{K}{L}, \frac{H}{L})$

where<br>
Y = aggregate real output (GDP)<br>
K = amount of physical capital used<br>
L = amount of labour used<br>
H = amount of human capital used<br>
A = total factor productivity, accounting for output that is not a result of the productive inputs, such as effects of technology.

```{note}
The positive marginal productivity of physical capital (MP.) is the amount by which productivity is increased as the result of a small increase in physical capital used. An increase in physical capital is one source of higher productivity, but it is subject to diminishing returns to physical capital or diminishing marginal productivity of (physical) capital (dim MP.).
```

Growth accounting has shown that rising total factor productivity, interpreted as the effect of technological progress, is central to long-run economic growth.

Natural resources are less important today than physical and human capital as sources of productivity growth in most economies.

### Why Growth Rates Differ

Different rates at which countries accumulate
- Physical capital
- Human capital
- Technological progress.

**AND**

The prime cause is differences in rates of
- Domestic savings and investment spending
- Differences in education levels, and research and development.

Government actions can promote or hinder the sources of long-term growth. They can promote growth by
- Subsidies to infrastructure
    - public health infrastructure
- Subsidies to education
- Subsidies to R&D
- Maintenance of a well-functioning financial system.

Governments improve the environment for growth by
- Protecting property rights (particularly intellectual property rights through patents)
- By providing political stability
- Through good governance<br>Poor governance includes corruption and excessive government intervention.

### Success, Disappointment, and Failure

- East Asia's spectacular growth was generated by high savings and investment spending rates, an emphasis on education, and adoption of technological advances from other countries.
- Poor education, political instability, and irresponsible government policies are major factors in the slow growth of Latin America.
- In sub-Saharan Africa, severe instability, war, and poor infrastructure - particularly affecting public health - resulted in a catastrophic failure of growth. But economic performance in recent years has been much better than in preceding years.
- While the world economy as a whole has grown rapidly in recent decades, the growth has been uneven.

### Is World Growth Sustainable?

Environmental degradation poses a major challenge to sustainable long-run economic growth.

In the Paris Agreement of 2015, 196 countries agreed to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions in an effort to limit the rise in Earth's temperature.